---
layout: post
title: Not Your Common Binary Tree Data Structure
description: The Leaf Tree structure
tags: [trees, leaf-tree, binary-tree, data-structures, tutorials]
categories: [tutorials, trees]
---
{% include JB/setup %}
##1 - Intro
First and foremost, the materials I am working with is found in Peter Brass's Advanced Data Structures book.
For my first post, I'd like to introduce a tree data structure that is not so commonly used or taught compared to the "traditional" tree. When I was working with these trees, I realized that I couldn't find any good description of them online. It might be because they have a more technical name than what I was told. I was told they are called leaf trees, but other than the book I am using as reference, I could not find any other resources online about leaf trees.

First, allow me to describe the traditional tree structure. 
##2 - The Node Tree
This data structure can be referred to as the "Node Tree", and is taught in most, if not all data structures/algorithms classes. It is a very simple tree structure with each node being an object. For example:
			
`Example 1:` A regular node tree

				5
				|
			3		6
			|		|
		   1	  4	     null   7
		
As you probably already know, in order to find an object, there are 3 conditions:

	while node != NULL
		if query == node->data
			return node->data  // or some success flag
		if query < node->data
			node = node->left
		else  //if query >= node->data
			node = node->right
##3 - Find Comparison Problem
Now say you want to find 7. Let's trace through every step of this query:

`Example 2:` Trace of find(7), starting at the root (object 5) for node tree

	1 - Is 7 == 5? No
	2 - Is 7 < 5? No
	3 - Is 7 >= 5? Yes, go right
	4 - Is 7 == 6? No
	5 - Is 7 < 6? No
	6 - Is 7 >= 6? Yes, go right
	7 - Is 7 == 7? Yes, return
	
If you haven't yet noticed, in this example we are executing 7 comparison steps in order to find object 7. Note that the trace doesn't take into account the while(node != NULL) condition check. If you look at the tree in `Example 1`, we would ideally want it to execute 3 steps to get to object 7, but that is impossible. This is the first problem that we encounter with the popular node tree. Although it seems like an insignificant issue because comparisons are so fast, imagine an extremely complex system with overloaded comparisons that require a lot of computations. We wouldn't want so many steps if that were the case.
##4 - Leaf Trees
The solution to this problem is another very simple tree structure called the "Leaf Tree"! Unlike the node tree where the objects are stored within the nodes and the leaves, the leaf tree has objects stored only within the leaves - with every node that is not a leaf being a comparison node, also called "internal nodes". So now, the tree from `Example 1` will look like this:

`Example 3:` The leaf tree version

                                     5
                                     |
                     3                              6
                     |                              |
             1             4               5                7
             |             |               |                |
            1 null     3       4       5       6           7 null
                       |       |       |       |       
                      3 null  4 null  5 null  6 null  
       
At first glance, the leaf tree seems more complex. We can see that it has more nodes and a bigger height. Wouldn't that mean it is slower than the tree from `Example 1`? One can also  make the argument that in the node tree, a query can succeed before reaching a leaf, making it faster. Like if we were to execute find(3). We don't need to traverse all the way to the leaf nodes to find the object 3 in a node tree, but we have to in the leaf tree. These are all very intuitively sound arguments, however, these cases are not faster **most** of the time.
Before we trace through `Example 2` with the leaf tree, let's define the conditions for traversal. 

	while node->right != NULL
		if query < node->data
			node = node->left
		else  // if query >= node->data
			node = node->right
	if query == node->data
		return node->left->data	  // or some success flag
	
I will now explain the traversal algorithm. We want the condition while(node->right != NULL) because that means we have not yet reached the leaf. Remember, the idea of using the leaf tree is to have every single object in the leaves. The internal nodes (non-leaf nodes) does not hold any meaningful value, other than for comparison. Once the condition in the while loop breaks, i.e. when (node->right == NULL), that means we have **reached the last internal node that points to the object that we are looking for**. So at this point, node->right == NULL and node->left is the object. These two cases must hold for the tree to be a correct leaf tree.

Let's trace through `Example 2` again, but this time with the leaf tree.

`Example 4:` Trace of find(7), starting at the root (object 5) for leaf tree

	1 - Is 7 < 5? No
	2 - Is 7 >= 5? Yes, go right
	3 - Is 7 < 6? No
	4 - Is 7 >= 6? Yes, go right // we exit the loop after this because node->right == NULL
	5 - Is 7 == 7? Yes, return
	
Notice how much faster it is to traverse a leaf tree compared to a node tree. As we argued earlier, that in a node tree, finding the object might happen before reaching a leaf, making it faster. That is an absolutely correct statement only if the object node has a low depth from the root. For example, finding the value of 5 in a node tree is faster than finding it in a leaf tree. But in the example of finding the value of 7, we can already begin to see that it is faster by 2 comparison steps in the leaf tree than in the node tree. Now increase the space complexity of the tree by millions and I hope you can see which is the superior tree.

Another nice property of the leaf tree is that its structure is always a full binary tree. Recall that a full binary tree is a tree in which every node other than the leaves have left and right children. This is not the case for node trees, unless other methods are implemented to rebalance.

##Summary
We have taken a first look a the leaf tree structure and compared it with the node tree. We know that for a leaf tree:
* Objects are stored in the leaves
* Internal nodes are only for comparison
* It requires less comparisons when traversing the tree
* In order for it to be a leaf tree, the following constraints must be true:
	1. A node is a leaf if node->right == NULL && node->left points to the object && node->key == node->left->key
	2. If root->left == NULL, we have an empty tree
	3. If root->left != NULL && root->right == NULL, the root is a leaf
	4. If root->left != NULL && root->right != NULL, then root->right and root->left point to left and right subtrees.
	5. Each currentNode->left->key < currentNode->key && currentNode->right->key >= currentNode->key
* Leaf trees are always full binary trees

The only downside to leaf trees is the extra storage space required for the internal comparison nodes. So some things to note are the trade offs between space and time efficiency.

We will learn about the specific operations of the leaf tree and their time complexities in the next tutorial.
